---
layout: page
category: doc
title: "Output"
order: 1
---

By default, results are provided to the standard output in the SAM format.
Use ```-out <filename>``` option to redirect output to a file.
Use ```-outfmt``` option to specify the output format:

```-outfmt sam``` : SAM format (default)

```-outfmt tabular``` : exports a simple tab delimited format defined below.

The output can be also compressed, using the ```-gzo``` flag:

```
magicblast -query reads.fa -db genome -out output.gz -gzo
```

#### Unaligned reads

By default Magic-BLAST reports unaligned reads, with unmapped bit (4) set in SAM flags or '*' in the second column of the tabular output. If you do not want unmapped reads reported, use ```-no_unaligned``` option:

```
magicblast -query reads -db reference -no_unaligned
```


#### Tabular output format

The tabular output format shows one alignment per line with these tab
delimited fields:

1. Query/read sequence identifier
2. Reference sequence identifier
3. Percent identity of the alignment
4. Not used
5. Not used
6. Not used
7. Alignment start position on the query sequence
8. Alignment stop position on the query sequence
9. Alignment start position on the reference sequence
10. Alignment stop position on the reference sequence
11. Not used
12. Not used
13. Alignment score
14. Query strand
15. Reference sequence strand
16. Query/read length
17. Alignment as extended BTOP string
    This is the same BTOP string as in BLAST tabular output with a
    few extensions:
    - a number represents this many matches,
    - two bases represent a mismatch and show query and reference base,
    - base and gap or gap and base, show a gap in query or reference,
    - ^\<number\>^ represents an intron of this number of bases,
    - \_\<number\>\_ represents an insertion (gap in reference) of this number of bases,
    - %\<number\>% represents a deletion (gap in read) of this number of bases,
    - (\<number\>) shows number of query bases that are shared between
    two parts of a spliced alignment; used when proper splice sites
    were not found
18. Number of different alignments reported for this query sequence
19. Not used
20. Compartment - a unique identifier for all alignments that belong to
    a single fragment. These can be two alignments for a pair of reads
    or alignments to exons that were not spliced.
21. Reverse complemented unaligned query sequence from the beginning
    of the query, or '-' if the query aligns to the left edge
22. Unaligned sequence at the end of the query, or '-'
23. Reference sequence identifier where the mate is aligned, if
    different from the identifier in column 2, otherwise '-'
24. Alignment start position on the reference sequence for the mate, or
    '-' if no alignment for the mate was found; a negative number
    denotes a divergent pair
25. Composite alignment score for all exons that belong to the fragment
